src/first-layout.md, before:

# Basic Data Layout

Alright, so what's a linked list? Well basically, it's a bunch of pieces of data
on the heap (hush, kernel people!) that point to each other in sequence. Linked
lists are something procedural programmers shouldn't touch with a 10-foot pole,
and what functional programmers use for everything. It seems fair, then, that we
should ask functional programmers for the definition of a linked list. They will
probably give you something like the following definition:

```haskell
List a = Empty | Elem a (List a)
```

Which reads approximately as "A List is either Empty or an Element followed by a
List". This is a recursive definition expressed as a *sum type*, which is a
fancy name for "a type that can have different values which may be different
types". Rust calls sum types `enum`s! If you're coming from a C-like language,
this is exactly the enum you know and love, but in overdrive. So let's
transcribe this functional definition into Rust!

For now we'll avoid generics to keep things simple. We'll only support
storing signed 32-bit integers:

```rust ,ignore
// in first.rs

// pub says we want people outside this module to be able to use List
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    Elem(i32, List),
}
```

*phew*, I'm swamped. Let's just go ahead and compile that:

```text
> cargo build

error[E0072]: recursive type `first::List` has infinite size
 --> src/first.rs:4:1
  |
4 | pub enum List {
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^ recursive type has infinite size
5 |     Empty,
6 |     Elem(i32, List),
  |               ---- recursive without indirection
  |
  = help: insert indirection (e.g., a `Box`, `Rc`, or `&`) at some point to make `first::List` representable
```

Well. I don't know about you, but I certainly feel betrayed by the functional
programming community.

If we actually check out the error message (after we get over the whole
betrayal thing), we can see that rustc is actually telling us exactly
how to solve this problem:

> insert indirection (e.g., a `Box`, `Rc`, or `&`) at some point to make `first::List` representable

Alright, `box`. What's that? Let's google `rust box`...

> [std::boxed::Box - Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/boxed/struct.Box.html)

Lesse here...

> `pub struct Box<T>(_);`
>
> A pointer type for heap allocation.
> See the [module-level documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/boxed/) for more.

*clicks link*

> `Box<T>`, casually referred to as a 'box', provides the simplest form of heap allocation in Rust. Boxes provide ownership for this allocation, and drop their contents when they go out of scope.
>
> Examples
>
> Creating a box:
>
> `let x = Box::new(5);`
>
> Creating a recursive data structure:
>
```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
enum List<T> {
    Cons(T, Box<List<T>>),
    Nil,
}
```
>
```rust ,ignore
fn main() {
    let list: List<i32> = List::Cons(1, Box::new(List::Cons(2, Box::new(List::Nil))));
    println!("{:?}", list);
}
```
>
> This will print `Cons(1, Box(Cons(2, Box(Nil))))`.
>
> Recursive structures must be boxed, because if the definition of Cons looked like this:
>
> `Cons(T, List<T>),`
>
> It wouldn't work. This is because the size of a List depends on how many elements are in the list, and so we don't know how much memory to allocate for a Cons. By introducing a Box, which has a defined size, we know how big Cons needs to be.

Wow, uh. That is perhaps the most relevant and helpful documentation I have ever seen. Literally the first thing in the documentation is *exactly what we're trying to write, why it didn't work, and how to fix it*.

Dang, docs rule.

Ok, let's do that:

```rust ,ignore
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    Elem(i32, Box<List>),
}
```

```text
> cargo build

   Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.22s
```

Hey it built!

...but this is actually a really foolish definition of a List, for a few reasons.

Consider a list with two elements:

```text
[] = Stack
() = Heap

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Empty, *junk*)
```

There are two key issues:

* We're allocating a node that just says "I'm not actually a Node"
* One of our nodes isn't heap-allocated at all.

On the surface, these two seem to cancel each-other out. We heap-allocate an
extra node, but one of our nodes doesn't need to be heap-allocated at all.
However, consider the following potential layout for our list:

```text
[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, *null*)
```

In this layout we now unconditionally heap allocate our nodes. The
key difference is the absence of the *junk* from our first layout. What is
this junk? To understand that, we'll need to look at how an enum is laid out
in memory.

In general, if we have an enum like:

```rust ,ignore
enum Foo {
    D1(T1),
    D2(T2),
    ...
    Dn(Tn),
}
```

A Foo will need to store some integer to indicate which *variant* of the enum it
represents (`D1`, `D2`, .. `Dn`). This is the *tag* of the enum. It will also
need enough space to store the *largest* of `T1`, `T2`, .. `Tn` (plus some extra
space to satisfy alignment requirements).

The big takeaway here is that even though `Empty` is a single bit of
information, it necessarily consumes enough space for a pointer and an element,
because it has to be ready to become an `Elem` at any time. Therefore the first
layout heap allocates an extra element that's just full of junk, consuming a
bit more space than the second layout.

One of our nodes not being allocated at all is also, perhaps surprisingly,
*worse* than always allocating it. This is because it gives us a *non-uniform*
node layout. This doesn't have much of an appreciable effect on pushing and
popping nodes, but it does have an effect on splitting and merging lists.

Consider splitting a list in both layouts:

```text
layout 1:

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Elem C, ptr) -> (Empty *junk*)

split off C:

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Empty *junk*)
[Elem C, ptr] -> (Empty *junk*)
```

```text
layout 2:

[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Elem C, *null*)

split off C:

[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, *null*)
[ptr] -> (Elem C, *null*)
```

Layout 2's split involves just copying B's pointer to the stack and nulling
the old value out. Layout 1 ultimately does the same thing, but also has to
copy C from the heap to the stack. Merging is the same process in reverse.

One of the few nice things about a linked list is that you can construct the
element in the node itself, and then freely shuffle it around lists without
ever moving it. You just fiddle with pointers and stuff gets "moved". Layout 1
trashes this property.

Alright, I'm reasonably convinced Layout 1 is bad. How do we rewrite our List?
Well, we could do something like:

```rust ,ignore
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    ElemThenEmpty(i32),
    ElemThenNotEmpty(i32, Box<List>),
}
```

Hopefully this seems like an even worse idea to you. Most notably, this really
complicates our logic, because there is now a completely invalid state:
`ElemThenNotEmpty(0, Box(Empty))`. It also *still* suffers from non-uniformly
allocating our elements.

However it does have *one* interesting property: it totally avoids allocating
the Empty case, reducing the total number of heap allocations by 1. Unfortunately,
in doing so it manages to waste *even more space*! This is because the previous
layout took advantage of the *null pointer optimization*.

We previously saw that every enum has to store a *tag* to specify which variant
of the enum its bits represent. However, if we have a special kind of enum:

```rust,ignore
enum Foo {
    A,
    B(ContainsANonNullPtr),
}
```

the null pointer optimization kicks in, which *eliminates the space needed for
the tag*. If the variant is A, the whole enum is set to all `0`'s. Otherwise,
the variant is B. This works because B can never be all `0`'s, since it contains
a non-zero pointer. Slick!

Can you think of other enums and types that could do this kind of optimization?
There's actually a lot! This is why Rust leaves enum layout totally unspecified.
There are a few more complicated enum layout optimizations that Rust will do for
us, but the null pointer one is definitely the most important!
It means `&`, `&mut`, `Box`, `Rc`, `Arc`, `Vec`, and
several other important types in Rust have no overhead when put in an `Option`!
(We'll get to most of these in due time.)

So how do we avoid the extra junk, uniformly allocate, *and* get that sweet
null-pointer optimization? We need to better separate out the idea of having an
element from allocating another list. To do this, we have to think a little more
C-like: structs!

While enums let us declare a type that can contain *one* of several values,
structs let us declare a type that contains *many* values at once. Let's break
our List into two types: A List, and a Node.

As before, a List is either Empty or has an element followed by another List.
By representing the "has an element followed by another List" case by an
entirely separate type, we can hoist the Box to be in a more optimal position:

```rust ,ignore
struct Node {
    elem: i32,
    next: List,
}

pub enum List {
    Empty,
    More(Box<Node>),
}
```

Let's check our priorities:

* Tail of a list never allocates extra junk: check!
* `enum` is in delicious null-pointer-optimized form: check!
* All elements are uniformly allocated: check!

Alright! We actually just constructed exactly the layout that we used to
demonstrate that our first layout (as suggested by the official Rust
documentation) was problematic.

```text
> cargo build

warning: private type `first::Node` in public interface (error E0446)
 --> src/first.rs:8:10
  |
8 |     More(Box<Node>),
  |          ^^^^^^^^^
  |
  = note: #[warn(private_in_public)] on by default
  = warning: this was previously accepted by the compiler but
    is being phased out; it will become a hard error in a future release!
```

:(

Rust is mad at us again. We marked the `List` as public (because we want people
to be able to use it), but not the `Node`. The problem is that the internals of
an `enum` are totally public, and we're not allowed to publicly talk about
private types. We could make all of `Node` totally public, but generally in Rust
we favour keeping implementation details private. Let's make `List` a struct, so
that we can hide the implementation details:

```rust ,ignore
pub struct List {
    head: Link,
}

enum Link {
    Empty,
    More(Box<Node>),
}

struct Node {
    elem: i32,
    next: Link,
}
```

Because `List` is a struct with a single field, its size is the same as that
field. Yay zero-cost abstractions!

```text
> cargo build

warning: field is never used: `head`
 --> src/first.rs:2:5
  |
2 |     head: Link,
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^
  |
  = note: #[warn(dead_code)] on by default

warning: variant is never constructed: `Empty`
 --> src/first.rs:6:5
  |
6 |     Empty,
  |     ^^^^^

warning: variant is never constructed: `More`
 --> src/first.rs:7:5
  |
7 |     More(Box<Node>),
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

warning: field is never used: `elem`
  --> src/first.rs:11:5
   |
11 |     elem: i32,
   |     ^^^^^^^^^

warning: field is never used: `next`
  --> src/first.rs:12:5
   |
12 |     next: Link,
   |     ^^^^^^^^^^

```

Alright, that compiled! Rust is pretty mad, because as far as it can tell,
everything we've written is totally useless: we never use `head`, and no one who
uses our library can either since it's private. Transitively, that means Link
and Node are useless too. So let's solve that! Let's implement some code for our
List!

Commit message:

Add notes to first-layout.md

src/first-layout.md, after:

# Basic Data Layout

Alright, so what's a linked list? Well basically, it's a bunch of pieces of data
on the heap (hush, kernel people!) that point to each other in sequence. Linked
lists are something procedural programmers shouldn't touch with a 10-foot pole,
and what functional programmers use for everything. It seems fair, then, that we
should ask functional programmers for the definition of a linked list. They will
probably give you something like the following definition:

```haskell
List a = Empty | Elem a (List a)
```

Which reads approximately as "A List is either Empty or an Element followed by a
List". This is a recursive definition expressed as a *sum type*, which is a
fancy name for "a type that can have different values which may be different
types". Rust calls sum types `enum`s! If you're coming from a C-like language,
this is exactly the enum you know and love, but in overdrive. So let's
transcribe this functional definition into Rust!

<details><summary>Linked List</summary>
Heap allocated data structure, pointer to the first node is stored in memory, and every node has pointer to next as part of its implementation, so each node is at least some value and pointer to next. List is not contignius data structures nodes are scattered across memory, therefor accessing a node in list is slover than simply moving pointer in array.
</details>


For now we'll avoid generics to keep things simple. We'll only support
storing signed 32-bit integers:

```rust ,ignore
// in first.rs

// pub says we want people outside this module to be able to use List
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    Elem(i32, List),
}
```

*phew*, I'm swamped. Let's just go ahead and compile that:

```text
> cargo build

error[E0072]: recursive type `first::List` has infinite size
 --> src/first.rs:4:1
  |
4 | pub enum List {
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^ recursive type has infinite size
5 |     Empty,
6 |     Elem(i32, List),
  |               ---- recursive without indirection
  |
  = help: insert indirection (e.g., a `Box`, `Rc`, or `&`) at some point to make `first::List` representable
```

Well. I don't know about you, but I certainly feel betrayed by the functional
programming community.

If we actually check out the error message (after we get over the whole
betrayal thing), we can see that rustc is actually telling us exactly
how to solve this problem:

> insert indirection (e.g., a `Box`, `Rc`, or `&`) at some point to make `first::List` representable

Alright, `box`. What's that? Let's google `rust box`...

> [std::boxed::Box - Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/boxed/struct.Box.html)

Lesse here...

> `pub struct Box<T>(_);`
>
> A pointer type for heap allocation.
> See the [module-level documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/boxed/) for more.

*clicks link*

> `Box<T>`, casually referred to as a 'box', provides the simplest form of heap allocation in Rust. Boxes provide ownership for this allocation, and drop their contents when they go out of scope.
>
> Examples
>
> Creating a box:
>
> `let x = Box::new(5);`
>
> Creating a recursive data structure:
>
```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
enum List<T> {
    Cons(T, Box<List<T>>),
    Nil,
}
```
>
```rust ,ignore
fn main() {
    let list: List<i32> = List::Cons(1, Box::new(List::Cons(2, Box::new(List::Nil))));
    println!("{:?}", list);
}
```
>
> This will print `Cons(1, Box(Cons(2, Box(Nil))))`.
>
> Recursive structures must be boxed, because if the definition of Cons looked like this:
>
> `Cons(T, List<T>),`
>
> It wouldn't work. This is because the size of a List depends on how many elements are in the list, and so we don't know how much memory to allocate for a Cons. By introducing a Box, which has a defined size, we know how big Cons needs to be. This comes from the fact that stack frame for the function can only save values whose size is now at compile time. Since size List is dynamically growing structure it's size is not known. To work around this limitation if List is placed bihind some pointer (whose size is perfectly known). For reference have a look at [Visualizing memory layout of Rust's data types](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rDoqT-a6UFg&t=1942s)

Wow, uh. That is perhaps the most relevant and helpful documentation I have ever seen. Literally the first thing in the documentation is *exactly what we're trying to write, why it didn't work, and how to fix it*.

Dang, docs rule.

Ok, let's do that:

```rust ,ignore
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    Elem(i32, Box<List>),
}
```

```text
> cargo build

   Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.22s
```

Hey it built!

...but this is actually a really foolish definition of a List, for a few reasons.

Consider a list with two elements:

```text
[] = Stack
() = Heap

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Empty, *junk*)
```

There are two key issues:

* We're allocating a node that just says "I'm not actually a Node"
* One of our nodes isn't heap-allocated at all.

On the surface, these two seem to cancel each-other out. We heap-allocate an
extra node, but one of our nodes doesn't need to be heap-allocated at all.
However, consider the following potential layout for our list:

```text
[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, *null*)
```

In this layout we now unconditionally heap allocate our nodes. The
key difference is the absence of the *junk* from our first layout. What is
this junk? To understand that, we'll need to look at how an enum is laid out
in memory.

In general, if we have an enum like:

```rust ,ignore
enum Foo {
    D1(T1),
    D2(T2),
    ...
    Dn(Tn),
}
```

A Foo will need to store some integer to indicate which *variant* of the enum it
represents (`D1`, `D2`, .. `Dn`). This is the *tag* of the enum. It will also
need enough space to store the *largest* of `T1`, `T2`, .. `Tn` (plus some extra
space to satisfy alignment requirements).

The big takeaway here is that even though `Empty` is a single bit of
information, it necessarily consumes enough space for a pointer and an element,
because it has to be ready to become an `Elem` at any time. Therefore the first
layout heap allocates an extra element that's just full of junk, consuming a
bit more space than the second layout.

One of our nodes not being allocated at all is also, perhaps surprisingly,
*worse* than always allocating it. This is because it gives us a *non-uniform*
node layout. This doesn't have much of an appreciable effect on pushing and
popping nodes, but it does have an effect on splitting and merging lists.

Consider splitting a list in both layouts:

```text
layout 1:

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Elem C, ptr) -> (Empty *junk*)

split off C:

[Elem A, ptr] -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Empty *junk*)
[Elem C, ptr] -> (Empty *junk*)
```

```text
layout 2:

[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, ptr) -> (Elem C, *null*)

split off C:

[ptr] -> (Elem A, ptr) -> (Elem B, *null*)
[ptr] -> (Elem C, *null*)
```

Layout 2's split involves just copying B's pointer to the stack and nulling
the old value out. Layout 1 ultimately does the same thing, but also has to
copy C from the heap to the stack. Merging is the same process in reverse.

One of the few nice things about a linked list is that you can construct the
element in the node itself, and then freely shuffle it around lists without
ever moving it. You just fiddle with pointers and stuff gets "moved". Layout 1
trashes this property.

Alright, I'm reasonably convinced Layout 1 is bad. How do we rewrite our List?
Well, we could do something like:

```rust ,ignore
pub enum List {
    Empty,
    ElemThenEmpty(i32),
    ElemThenNotEmpty(i32, Box<List>),
}
```

Hopefully this seems like an even worse idea to you. Most notably, this really
complicates our logic, because there is now a completely invalid state:
`ElemThenNotEmpty(0, Box(Empty))`. It also *still* suffers from non-uniformly
allocating our elements.

However it does have *one* interesting property: it totally avoids allocating
the Empty case, reducing the total number of heap allocations by 1. Unfortunately,
in doing so it manages to waste *even more space*! This is because the previous
layout took advantage of the *null pointer optimization*.

We previously saw that every enum has to store a *tag* to specify which variant
of the enum its bits represent. However, if we have a special kind of enum:

```rust,ignore
enum Foo {
    A,
    B(ContainsANonNullPtr),
}
```

the null pointer optimization kicks in, which *eliminates the space needed for
the tag*. If the variant is A, the whole enum is set to all `0`'s. Otherwise,
the variant is B. This works because B can never be all `0`'s, since it contains
a non-zero pointer. Slick!   
More about enum memory layout in [Visualizing memory layout of Rust's data types](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rDoqT-a6UFg&t=1942s) video.

Can you think of other enums and types that could do this kind of optimization?
There's actually a lot! This is why Rust leaves enum layout totally unspecified.
There are a few more complicated enum layout optimizations that Rust will do for
us, but the null pointer one is definitely the most important!
It means `&`, `&mut`, `Box`, `Rc`, `Arc`, `Vec`, and
several other important types in Rust have no overhead when put in an `Option`!
(We'll get to most of these in due time.)

So how do we avoid the extra junk, uniformly allocate, *and* get that sweet
null-pointer optimization? We need to better separate out the idea of having an
element from allocating another list. To do this, we have to think a little more
C-like: structs!

While enums let us declare a type that can contain *one* of several values,
structs let us declare a type that contains *many* values at once. Let's break
our List into two types: A List, and a Node.

As before, a List is either Empty or has an element followed by another List.
By representing the "has an element followed by another List" case by an
entirely separate type, we can hoist the Box to be in a more optimal position:

```rust ,ignore
struct Node {
    elem: i32,
    next: List,
}

pub enum List {
    Empty,
    More(Box<Node>),
}
```

Let's check our priorities:

* Tail of a list never allocates extra junk: check!
* `enum` is in delicious null-pointer-optimized form: check!
* All elements are uniformly allocated: check!

Alright! We actually just constructed exactly the layout that we used to
demonstrate that our first layout (as suggested by the official Rust
documentation) was problematic.

```text
> cargo build

warning: private type `first::Node` in public interface (error E0446)
 --> src/first.rs:8:10
  |
8 |     More(Box<Node>),
  |          ^^^^^^^^^
  |
  = note: #[warn(private_in_public)] on by default
  = warning: this was previously accepted by the compiler but
    is being phased out; it will become a hard error in a future release!
```

:(

Rust is mad at us again. We marked the `List` as public (because we want people
to be able to use it), but not the `Node`. The problem is that the internals of
an `enum` are totally public, and we're not allowed to publicly talk about
private types. We could make all of `Node` totally public, but generally in Rust
we favour keeping implementation details private. Let's make `List` a struct, so
that we can hide the implementation details:

```rust ,ignore
// entry-point link structure, first element.
pub struct List {
    head: Link,
}

// enum that can be noting, or pointer (since Box is a pointer) to other node.
// So with small ammount of inderection it mimic linked list created with C lang.
enum Link {
    Empty,
    More(Box<Node>),
}

// node holds some value and link to other Node.
struct Node {
    elem: i32,
    next: Link,
}
```

Because `List` is a struct with a single field, its size is the same as that
field. Yay zero-cost abstractions!

```text
> cargo build

warning: field is never used: `head`
 --> src/first.rs:2:5
  |
2 |     head: Link,
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^
  |
  = note: #[warn(dead_code)] on by default

warning: variant is never constructed: `Empty`
 --> src/first.rs:6:5
  |
6 |     Empty,
  |     ^^^^^

warning: variant is never constructed: `More`
 --> src/first.rs:7:5
  |
7 |     More(Box<Node>),
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

warning: field is never used: `elem`
  --> src/first.rs:11:5
   |
11 |     elem: i32,
   |     ^^^^^^^^^

warning: field is never used: `next`
  --> src/first.rs:12:5
   |
12 |     next: Link,
   |     ^^^^^^^^^^

```

Alright, that compiled! Rust is pretty mad, because as far as it can tell,
everything we've written is totally useless: we never use `head`, and no one who
uses our library can either since it's private. Transitively, that means Link
and Node are useless too. So let's solve that! Let's implement some code for our
List!
